In this lecture what we're trying to do
is introduce parameters to the model or
try to see how a company can take into
account other things that change while
it's taking actions, which is in
our example changing the price.
So let's try to see how a company
now can maximize its profit.
One thing to remember is that revenue,
which is how much money the company makes,
does not automatically translate into
profit because the company also has costs.
Maybe some time it actually
cost more to produce an item
than the amount of money you
make if you sell it too cheaply.
So, in this case, the company would
like to maximize it's profits, and
he wants to make sure
that after paying for
all of the production costs of the item,
it has money left in the bank.
It actually can make money and
continue operating.
So now we must take into
account the cost of the item.
And the goal, as I said,
is to maximize the profit,
which is revenues minus the costs.
So let's introduce cost to the model.
Suppose each product in the same
model we've discussed before,
costs $2 to produce.
What we can do is we can take the same
graph of revenue we created before, and
for each price point on
the x-axis we now add a point of
the total cost it would cost us to produce
those amount of items we're setting.
So, in this case,
you can see the red dotted line,
this is the total cost
we're going to produce.
Some interesting things we can see
in this graph is first of all,
that if we sell the product too cheaply,
although the quantity may be high,
the revenue is low, and it's actually
revenue is lower than the cost.
We're actually going to loose some money.
One the left hand side, you can see that
the red dot is higher than the blue does,
where actually the profit
there is negative.
Now if you look at towards the right hand
side of the graph when we're increasing
price and the revenue,
the blue dots, go up and
up, costs also go down because
the quantities we're setting go lower.
And at some point, and
this is where the green arrow is,
we're maximizing our profit,
which is basically the distance or
the difference between the revenues and
the cost.
At that point, we're trying to find out
what is the price we'd like to send,
we would like to sell the product for.
How can we find this maximum profit?
In some cases, it's not very
convenient to use the revenue and
the cost graph I've shown you.
And we can just take
the difference of them.
We can take the same table I've shown
you in the previous lecture, and
now calculate the cost,
calculate the revenue, do revenue minus
the cost, and you will get a profit.
In this case, we get a profit graph.
And we can see that the price of roughly
$6.5 we're going to maximize the profit.
However, it's a bit hard to tell
from this graph where the profit is.
And also it's going to be very hard to do
it for a very big combination of prices.
And one question I would like to ask is,
can we find a principle?
Can we find the way to find
where the maximum profit is
without having to actually calculate
the profit and calculate those, and
draw these graphs for
every combination of prices?
Now the answer is yes, and let's take
a look at what kind of forces or
trade-offs operate in this profit graph.
So what we're trying to see so,
if we can apply a principle,
instead of drawing complex graphs or
using the table, that will apply and
help us find the maximum profit
in any types of these problems.
So let's take a look at the different
forces operating in this type of
problem I've shown you in
the previous slide using the graph.
One thing we notice is that selling too
cheaply yields a negative profit, okay?
There's actually a maximum
amount you want to sell in order to
make a profit from your company.
The other thing is that the optimal price
we found that generates the maximum profit
is different than the price we found that
generates the maximum revenue, right?
Actually we needed to
increase the price slightly
from $5.5 to $6.5 to get a higher profit.
And the question is can we
actually use this principle?
Do we actually need to increase the price,
in order to increase the profit,
when we include costs in our model, right?
Because in the revenue example
we assumed there's no cost, and
when we introduced a profit and introduced
cost, now we see that we need to
actually increase the price
to generate more profit.
So let's try to understand
what does optimization do?
What does this maximize
profit process actually do?
And the idea is that we're actually
trying to change the price and
increase it slowly, until the benefit
of the revenue doesn't go higher
than the actual cost we're introducing,
by producing less or more items.
So let's take a look at an example.
What happens when we increase
the price from $1.5 to $2.0, okay?
What we're going to see is, first of all,
the revenue's going to increase
from $13.17 to $16.66.
So the difference is going to be $3.49.
We actually achieved a gain in revenue,
but
also there is going to
be a decrease in costs.
And why?
We increased the price a little bit,
the quantity went down, and
actually it costs us less
to produce the product.
In this case, the cost went down by $0.9,
and the total gain in profit is $4.39.
So actually we still have a positive
gain in profit if we increase
the price from $1.5 to $2.0.
Now what happens if we
increase the price too much?
Let's take a look at what happens when
we increase the price from $6.5 To $7.0.
We do the same calculation as before.
Now the revenue actually decreases.
It decreases from $27.82 to $26.81, so
actually we have a loss
of revenue of $1.01.
This is why we have a negative
sign in this slide.
And also the costs go down because,
again, when we increase the price,
the quantity goes down.
In this case, the cost goes down by $0.9.
When we sum them up together or
we take the difference to find revenue
minus the cost, we will see that actually
we have a negative change in profit,
and we actually lost 11 cents.
So in this case, we see if we
increase the price from a small
price to a slightly higher price,
we have a positive gain in profit.
And if we increase the price from
a very high price to even higher price,
we have a negative gain in profit.
And this leads us to the principle
we were looking, right?
What we saw is that we're slowly
increasing the price in which
we get a different increase or
decrease in profit.
And the question is how far
should we increase the price and
find optimal profit?
How far or how high should we
set the price to say stop here?
This is the optimal profit.
And the idea is that you just increase
until the change in profit is 0,
until it turns from positive to negative.
And how can we find when this happens?
We can look at the change in revenue,
like we've seen before.
And we can look at the change in profit.
And when they're equal, when the increase
in revenue equals the increase in cost,
or the decrease in revenue equals
the decrease in cost, then we say,
we need to stop here and
this is the optimal profit.
This principle is called the marginal
revenue equals the marginal cost
principle.
Marginal revenue means by how much are we
increasing the revenue when we change
the price of the item by one unit.
And marginal cost means how much
is the increase in the cost
when we change the price of
the item another one unit, and
the change in those quantities
increase of decrease, okay?
And this principle applies to many,
many types of profit maximization.
So the previous slide, we've seen that
increasing the price from the low price to
the slightly higher price actually
generates a positive profit and
increases our profit.
While increasing the price again from
a very high price to even higher price
actually generates a negative profit and
decreases the profit.
So the question is how
do we know when to stop?
Should we start increasing the price,
and how can we find the optimal price?
And the answer is well we need to increase
the price until the gain in profit is 0,
right?
Until we're moving from a positive
gain to a negative gain.
Now how can we find that point easily
without actually trying to do the profit
calculations?
The answer is we can look at
the change in revenue, and
see when it equals the change in cost.
If the increase in revenue
equals the increase in cost,
then we're not going to
have an additional profit.
And also if the decrease in revenue
equals the decrease in cost,
we're also not going to
have an additional profit.
And this principle is called
the marginal revenue equals the marginal
cost principle.
The marginal revenue is the additional
revenue the company makes by selling
one more item.
By changing the quantity that it
sells from, let's say, one to two or
three to four, or four to five, and
the marginal cost is the actual
costs that the company needs to pay
in order to produce one more item.
And what we can do is we can look at the
tables, we've seen a few slides before and
actually take the differences
between every row.
And say how much would it cost
me to sell one more item, or
to sell two more items, or
to sell three more items?
And also by how much would the cost
increase by sending one more item,
or two more item, or three more items?
When those two numbers are equal,
this is when we find the optimal price and
the maximum profit.
And this called the marginal revenue
equals the marginal cost principal.